There are many places that are famous for
being so secretive and well-protected that
you can never visit them.
This list is not about them.
This is about the really well-guarded places
— ones that are so secret that you may not
have even heard about them.
Let’s take a look at 10 of our favorites…
10.
Iron Mountain
On surface, Iron Mountain is a nothing more
than a huge storage company.
However, they have one particular crown jewel
in their collection: Just a few miles from
Pittsburgh lies the Iron Mountain Vault of
Butler County.
It’s a giant underground complex built in
an abandoned limestone mine, and it hosts
a truly mind-boggling amount of treasure.
Within its confines, the truly powerful people
and institutions store the things they want
to keep really safe.
The company protects its clients’ confidentiality,
but if you think of a really big name, there’s
a good chance that they probably have some
secrets stowed away here.
Bill Gates stores the 27 million physical
images of the Corbis Image collection here.
The Smithsonian stores many of its records
in the vaults, and other clients include several
movie studios and, of course, the Government.
It’s easy to see why the Iron Mountain vault
is such a massive hit among the wealthy and
safety-conscious.
The complex is harder to enter than the White
House.
2,700 people work in this vast network of
white corridors that look like they’re from
a James Bond movie.
The vault has its own five-engine fire department,
and 125 massive, well-protected vaults that
are artificially cooled with 50-degree water
from an underground lake.
9.
HavenCo
You might have heard of Sealand, a small WWII-era
anti-aircraft platform in the international
waters of North Sea that became a micronation
in 1967.
Thanks to its lawless, grey area nature and
fairly secure physical location, Sealand has
been a home for all sorts of shady operators,
from pirate radio broadcasters to the Pirate
Bay and possibly even Wikileaks.
Still, perhaps the strangest operation that
has ever graced its deck is HavenCo.
Sean Hastings and Ryan Lacke founded HavenCo
in 2000 to act as a safe haven for all sorts
of data operators.
In their own words, their aim was to create
“the world’s first truly offshore, almost-anything-goes
electronic data haven — a place that occupies
a tantalizing gray zone between what’s legal
and what’s… possible.”
Creating a data haven into one of the most
difficult-to-reach places on earth was a brilliant,
if mildly unnerving concept that was at the
time hailed as potentially revolutionary.
However, there was a problem.
In fact, there were many problems.
First and foremost of them was the fact that
Sealand has always been on extremely shaky
legal ground.
It has no allies or international recognition,
so although it is very isolated and well-protected
by its remote location, any fool who can climb
onboard is technically free to take over.
In fact, it’s likely that the only reason
it hasn’t been attacked a dozen times over
is the fact that the United Kingdom is just
12 miles away and would probably take offense.
Another difficult nut to crack was the sad
fact that the only kind of content that their
owners couldn’t (or wouldn’t) host anywhere
else was the kind of content that was very,
very illegal.
This in turn meant that it would just be a
matter of time before just about every country
on Earth took a good look at HavenCo, and
ganged up on Sealand.
Perhaps this is why Sealand quietly “nationalized”
HavenCo just two years after its founding,
and moved all its data hosting services to
mainland UK a few years later.
8.
ADX Florence
File:ADX.CELL.DESIGN.svg
ADX Florence, aka The Administrative Maximum
Facility, is the toughest and most secure
“supermax” prison in the United States.
It’s the sort of place that is custom designed
to hold supervillains, and in a way, that’s
exactly what it does.
This is where the country stores the criminals
it wants to completely and utterly cut away
from the outside world, and its famous inmates
are a truly mind-boggling parade of terrorists
and maniacs.
You only need to look at the “bomber”
category of prisoners to get an idea of their
general notoriety: There’s Ramzi Yousef,
the man behind the 1993 bombing at the World
Trade Center, and Zacarias Moussaoui, who
carried on his work as a co-conspirator of
9/11.
There’s the “shoe bomber” Richard Reid,
“Unabomber” Ted Kaczynski, and even the
Boston Marathon bomber.
ADX is known as the “Alcatraz of the Rockies,”
and like its namesake, it’s virtually inescapable.
Heavily armed patrols and massive gun towers
watch the prisoners’ every move, and huge
walls with razor wire do their level best
to block away the mountains.
And that’s just for the one hour per day
when the prisoners are allowed to stretch
their feet.
For the other 23 hours, the vast majority
of them are locked away in their tiny, 7-by-12-foot
concrete cells, specifically designed so they
can’t move any furniture or even see the
sky from the window.
Everything is designed with control in mind,
and it’s so effective that one former warden
describes ADX as “life after death” … and,
in fact, much worse than death.
Perhaps the nastiest trick ADX pulls on its
prisoners is the very first one.
They arrive in prison buses or helicopters,
taking in the beautiful landscape of the Rocky
Mountains.
And then, they get inside the concrete hell
that blocks all of that beauty from their
view, and realize: That was the last time
they’d ever see such scenes again.
7.
Bank of England Gold Vault
Everyone knows about Fort Knox, where the
US stores its gold reserves.
The Bank of England gold vault is basically
that, but for the United Kingdom … and with
far more style.
A classy, imposing structure in the middle
of London’s Threadneedle street, this 1734
building has guarded a significant chunk of
the country’s gold bullion for literal centuries.
The bank building is known as “Old Lady,”
and it’s considered to be so difficult to
break into that there’s a popular saying:
“Safe as the Bank of England.”
The building’s walls are 8 feet thick, its
safety measures are top-notch, and even its
keys are foot-long monstrosities… which
are used in conjunction with ultramodern voice
activation lock technology, naturally.
Although generally considered impossible to
enter without permission, the Bank of England
has been breached once.
In 1836, the bank’s directors received a
mysterious letter that told them to meet its
writer in the gold bullion room at night.
They decided to see what this was all about,
and were extremely surprised when the writer
dislodged a few floorboards and casually appeared
through the floor, right at the agreed hour.
He was a sewer worker, and had noticed that
a certain drain ran directly underneath the
vault.
Fortunately for the bank managers, the man
didn’t use his knowledge for evil, and instead
chose to warn them about this security issue.
The bank rewarded the man with £800 (roughly
$100,000 in today’s cash), and presumably
blocked the drain immediately afterward, just
in case.
6.
Tumen River
On paper, Tumen River is a pretty poor excuse
for a river.
Its 320 miles are mostly pollution-tainted
water and sad, swampy marshland.
However, its geopolitical location has made
it one of the most important, well-guarded
bodies of water in the world.
It happens to be the border river to not two,
but three countries that are not exactly known
for their easy-going attitudes: North Korea,
China, and Russia.
Instead of the usual “thalweg principle”
of drawing the country borders by the deepest
point of the border river, a number of treaties,
disputes and Russia’s acute need to maintain
direct access to the Sea of Japan have turned
Tumen River into a strange layer cake of criss-crossing
borders.
There’s one particularly odd stretch where
the Chinese border extends as a tiny sliver
in the middle of the river, while Russia and
North Korea hold the shores.
So if you were to swim across, you’d first
go through a mile of North Korean waters,
then a 300-foot channel of Chinese water,
and then enter Russian waters.
Tumen River’s eccentric borders, tactical
location and the fact that many North Koreans
use it as an escape route from their country
have made it one of the most guarded rivers
in the world.
Of course, being a body of water, it’s still
one of the less fortified sections of the
North Korea-China border, and escapes across
the river are so common that the nearest Chinese
city is now one-third Korean-speaking.
North Korean officials are trying to fight
this by guarding the river even more ferociously.
In 2017, Pyongyang reportedly banned all citizens
from going within 500 feet of the river, regardless
of the fact that many of them do need water
for things like laundry and living.
5.
Bold Lane Car Park
In 2003, a science magazine published a study
that determined the safest places in the world.
Most of the list was what you’d expect:
Fort Knox, Air Force One, and other famous
places like that.
However, one entry made even the most experienced
science list connoisseurs do a double take:
A humble car park in Derby, UK, known as Bold
Lane Car Park.
Bold Lane Car Park was designed by Ken Wigley,
an agricultural engineer who had a chip on
his shoulder from the time his car window
was smashed and his stereo was stolen in an
airport car park.
This is why he designed Bold Lane to be a
very hostile place for car thieves and vandals.
The multi-story car park has all the usual
frills, such as CCTV cameras, barcode tickets,
panic buttons and controlled entry doors.
However, it also has a very clever, computer-controlled
motion sensor system that spots if a parked
car moves, and if the computer determines
that this should not be happening, the site
goes into full lockdown.
Not that this happens a lot, because at Bold
Lane, the cars that should be staying put
will stay put.
In fact, drivers are specifically requested
to secure their parking bay with a numerical
code that the system links with their ticket
so it can recognize if the driver has left
the car park or has returned to it by linking
the bay number with a ticket.
But what if a thief just walks in, wrecks
the ticket machine and drives through the
control gates after hot-wiring your car?
Don’t worry, Wigley thought of that, too:
Pedestrians can’t gain access to the car
park unless they have the ticket from when
their car entered.
4.
The Greenbrier
The Greenbrier resort has been a popular gathering
place for the rich and famous socialites since
the late 18th century.
Its fine premises, the nearby White Sulphur
Springs, and the legendary Old White golf
course built in 1914 have all attracted wealthy
visitors over the years.
But the Greenbrier used to have hidden depths…
literally.
Because of its luxury and relative proximity
to Washington DC, the government has often
used it for various purposes.
During WWII, the Greenbrier housed Axis diplomats
at the request of the State Department.
Then, it was converted to a massive hospital
that treated over 24,000 soldiers during the
war.
And that was just the beginning.
In 1958, the government secretly leased part
of the Greenbrier’s West Virginia Wing,
and started covertly constructing a large
bunker underneath it.
The 112,544-square-foot “emergency relocation
center” was built 720 feet into the hillside.
It took three years to complete, and could
accommodate 1,100 people: the entire US Congress
and the support staff it took to keep them
alive.
It had a 25-ton blast door that could, however,
be opened with just 50 pounds of pressure.
It had giant water tanks, purification equipment,
a power plant, top-notch healthcare facilities
and a communications area for TV and audio
production.
It even had full-size meeting rooms for both
House and Senate.
For 30 years, the bunker remained a secret.
It was constantly updated and maintained by
a tiny group of undercover government employees,
posing as a small audiovisual support service
company called Forsythe Associates.
There’s a good chance that this might still
be the case.
However, a crucial point for a facility like
this is that its location remains a secret.
And so it did, for more than three decades.
On May 31, 1992, The Washington Post published
an article which exposed the facility.
As a direct result, the US government began
de-commissioning The Bunker and ended the
lease agreement with The Greenbrier in 1995.
Now, should you wish to visit, you can get
a tour of the facility.
3.
The Swiss Vaults
The Swiss famously make excellent chocolate,
watches and cheese, but what really sets them
apart is their banking system.
A classic aspect of this is their ultra-secure
vaults.
You’ve probably seen movies where a character
visits a Swiss bank’s underground safety
locker vault that might look a lot like the
one above, which belongs to Credit Suisse.
Switzerland has a vault for everything.
There are secretive alpine gold stashes where
tiny metal doors leading into mountain tunnels
once used by the military are protected by
serious-looking men in bulletproof vests.
Private asset management companies offer increasingly
strange supervillain vaults under airports,
and in hyper-secure deep-mountain locations
(“access by helicopter or private plane”).
There’s even a decommissioned military bunker
where people can store their Bitcoins as personalized,
physical cryptographic keys.
2.
The Mormon Church’s Secret Vaults
The Mormons, aka The Church of the Latter-Day
Saints, have a massive secret vault in Utah.
This sounds pretty ominous even before you
hear that the site is called Granite Mountain.
It’s easy to suspect supervillain shenanigans
when a religious group starts setting up Iron
Mountain-style mountain bases, but according
to the Mormons themselves there is nothing
nefarious going on.
They’ve even opened the complex for a virtual
tour.
Despite its remoteness and the fact that they
don’t exactly welcome unannounced visitors,
the 50 on-site workers have precious little
time to plot for world domination.
They’re too busy digitizing and archiving
their material: The largest collection of
family history information in the world, which
Utah Mormons have been gathering since the
1930s.
We’re talking about 35 billion images of
genealogical information, most of it contained
on fragile material such as 2.4 million rolls
of microfilm.
It also stores material that the church sees
“key to church operations, leadership and
history.”
The reason why the site is fairly closed and
well-protected is simple: People destroy things.
Just the dust from your blue jeans can do
terrible things to fragile archived materials,
and constantly marching curious people through
the facility would make it borderline impossible
to control the temperature.
1.
Vatican Secret Archives
While we’re on the subject of religions
and their secret stashes, it’s impossible
not to mention the Vatican Secret Archives.
This grandiose collection of some of the most
interesting documents and artifacts not only
contains 12 centuries’ worth of history
— it contains the very things history was
made with.
The archives are not actually as secret as
legend has it — “secretum” actually
means “private” in Latin, Vatican’s
language of choice.
Still, a private archive in the most heavily
fortified part of Vatican doesn’t exactly
seem like open door policy, especially since
its indexes are not public and even dedicated
scholars can’t reach them until they’re
75 years old.
The archives’ main point is to house the
Pope’s official paperwork and correspondence,
along with other documents related to the
Holy See.
Of course, this means that it is full of original
documents that shaped history, so the people
who wish to access it have to go through a
very careful vetting process.
In recent years, the Vatican has tried to
be a bit more open about the Archives.
They’ve allowed journalists to tour the
complex, and even held a public exhibition
of selected works in 2012.
Still, the Archives continue to hold plenty
of secrets.
For one, Vatican refuses to release any documents
that are dated after 1939.
This may or may not mean that they’re sitting
on some stuff that indicates that the WWII-era
Pope, Pius XII, quietly collaborated with
Hitler when he didn’t speak up against
the Holocaust.